Travolution radio www.travolution.org.
[Music]
And well, today I am without my colleagues
from this
radio exercise, but well, we are here at
this meeting for biodiversity here
from Santiago de Chile, uh tourism at the
service of
nature conservation and the resilience of
territories.  We came here, we
came with this radio that travels, that has
traveled with communities throughout
Latin America, passing through
Chiloé, going up through Putre, arriving
in Colombia, through the
Colombian Pacific, through Tumaco, arriving through
Guaviare, through the jungles, going up to the
mountains, passing through Panama, arriving in
Guatemala and also a much longer leap
to the Iguazu Falls.
This radio has traveled, this radio has
moved like this and this is Travolution Radio.
We are here at this event organized
by the Travolution Foundation, the
laboratory for regeneration of the
Pontifical Catholic University of
Chile, Colab and the
Research Center for Technologies for
Society of the Faculty of Engineering,
UDD.  And this meeting has a
tremendous, but look at the people
who are listening to us right now with a
tremendous media partner.  The Southern Era.
We know the Southern Era, not only from the
Travolution exercise, not only
the people in Chile,
but also in other places, because we
are also followers of the
Southern Era content in general in
many places in Latin America and in
Colombia as well, where
a large part of this radio station is listening to us
because the Travolution exercise does
not only happen in Chile, but
also in Colombia.  Tenemos dos equipos
fuertes y es parte de este ejercicio.
Well, this panel, which is about
biodiversity outreach,
initially posed a very interesting question to us.
How can we communicate biodiversity in a
way that is approachable, creative, and accessible,
inspiring awareness, commitment, and
collective action?  Uh, we believe in the
media, we believe in the ways in
which we can explore communication
to reach different people.  And that is why we
also wanted to bring together
different people who, in their work, are
challenged every day
to create strategies, to create
approaches, to see the ways in which
access
to scientific knowledge could be democratized.  That access,
or that information,
is often difficult to digest in
our homes, in our
daily lives.  There are people who
then dedicate themselves to working together, to creating
an ecosystem precisely of information
to develop that
information that is so necessary to be
able to understand this complex issue that
seems or really is the
scientific topic, the issue of biodiversity.
And in this panel we will learn about their
perspectives, their experiences, but
above all what they do best
every day: enjoy this work
through communication.  Let me introduce myself, I
am Leo Prieto, I am a Colombian graphic communicator
and photographer.  I have been
working with Trvolution ORG for 8 years.
I am fortunate to travel to many places looking for stories, looking for stories of entrepreneurs, looking for stories of communities that tell us about their territories, and there in those small places there is incredible knowledge, and there in that corner of that lake, there is incredible knowledge.  How do we
get there?  How do we share this
knowledge?  How do we amplify this
information?  So, before I
introduce you, the people
who are here to sit on this panel,
I want to say hello to the people who are
connected right now via the
travolution.org
YouTube stream and the people who are going
to www.travolution.org right now
to listen to Travolution radio
.  So, let's watch a
clip from a video that
Travolution worked on with a community in
Colombia.  Let's see here with the master,
please.
Living in the corridor as a person
who contributes to his life by taking care of him and
asking him for the farino, creates for
us the conditions to feel
part of the umbrellas.  I am the
corridor of I live in the corridor of I
am there.  I am creating
detrimental conditions for him.  He is our child
.  He has to come and live among
us.
[Music]
What is being done in several
initiatives of the strategy
is precisely that children and
young people take ownership from a very young
age of the richness that our
current resources have, of that biodiversity
that exists.  So, that's why we're
doing community research with
TPA cameras, that is, to get to know the
wealth that exists in those places we don't really
know much about.
[Music]
The dynamics of monitoring are very
related to protection, to
conservation, and the producer himself,
sometimes his children, his wife, are telling us,
"It's that we are getting married, it's that
we are unbearably unborn, we are
ending the habit of being happy, and that's why this is
very important because the
people themselves are agreeing and with
them we can start a process so that he realizes
the richness that is there."
So they themselves are
helping us to see how
we can coexist with it and with the
associated fauna.
[Applause] We
have always said it, we are clear
that you have to know in order to conserve or
to preserve.  So, first of all,
there comes something very fundamental which is
academic tourism, scientific tourism
with the communities.
During the investments in the living classroom, we have
10 trap cameras and what we
do is teach the children how to
handle those cameras, giving them good
use.  What can we observe?  They also learned to
recognize footprints.  So,
tourism has been that engine, that
means, that bridge for us as a
united community to leave a mark
on the territory and for the
initiative to transcend from
generation to generation.
[Applause]
[Music]
Well, we're back here.  Travolution Radio,
a space for the meeting of
entrepreneurs and travelers of
community tourism.
Well, well, we're still here live
from Santiago, Chile, broadcasting
for Travolution Radio, this radio station that
takes us to many places.
Hey, a round of applause, please, because this is live, this is not pre-recorded, this is live radio.  Thank you so much.
We have a wonderful audience here, and we are
joined by people from different places here in
Chile and also from other places, from
Costa Rica, Colombia, and Uruguay.
Well, people come here from the north, from the
south.  Well, yesterday we were talking there
with communities, also sharing
these lessons from this place, and
you don't know what took me a
while ago.  While I was sitting here,
a man suddenly came up to me and said, "Hey, I have
some mail for you, and this is Evolution.
During the pandemic, we had something called 'the
little letter,' and 'the little letter with an
Argentinian accent' because the great
radio host is named Claudio Salvador. He lives near
Iguazu Falls, and the 'little letter with an
Argentinian accent' was what we received during the
pandemic. I received a very
beautiful letter, and I'm going to show it to you. This
letter is called 'The Bear and the Flower.' Look at
this, how beautiful! Um, it's a book
by our friend Alan Valverde, who
just happened to be here, and it's a
very beautiful book. I'm going to read it to you. In a
temperate forest, someone finds a
flower so beautiful and fragile that they feel the
urge to protect it. In their desire to
care for it, they discover that love isn't about
control. 'The Bear and the Flower' is
a story about freedom, tenderness, and
learning. Um, and well, introducing
this book of wings, thank you very much
for bringing it here to Radio Evolution.
Um, we're going to talk about..."
Biodiversity outreach, and without further ado, I'd
like to invite
René Araneda, Josefina
Gep, Paloma Ávila, Néida Paul, and
Francisca Lira to this radio table. Please, sit
here in this
order. René, Jose,
Paloma, Néida, and Néida over here. Oh, no,
Paloma over here. Nelia. That's it, Francisca. Very
good.
Well, here we are. Perfect.
How are you? How have you been?
Welcome to this radio table.
Welcome to this radio table here at
this biodiversity gathering.
Well, I'm going to introduce you here. I'd
like them to introduce themselves. I'm going
to give a brief overview for those
listening in other
countries, and we'll see who they are.
René is a director and producer who has
developed
natural history documentary production in Chile. That has been
his work for the last decade, and he has
also distinguished himself in
international productions for
multiple platforms and channels.
Josefina here in Chile has learned that
words are shortened,
names are shortened. So, if I say it wrong,
please tell me no. That's not how it's
said because, well, in our
contexts, names are remembered
differently, but I think
Josefina José. Yes, perfect. Good. An
agricultural engineer, yes, from the Pontifical
Catholic University of Chile with a
master's degree in environmental protection and management
from the University of Edinburgh
and a doctorate in
agricultural sciences. Yes, perfect. Look,
incredible. Ah, here I have Paloma.
Paloma.
Never Paloma. Palo, never.
Perfect. Very good. Thank you very much for the
clarification. Perfect. Paloma Ávila, a
journalist from the Catholic University of
Chile with more than 20 years of experience
in audiovisual production, television,
content development,
strategic communication, and science outreach.
We have Néida Paul. I had to
ask my colleague Jorge because I didn't
know how to pronounce the last name,
but well, he clarified it for me. You are the
communications director of the
Institute of Ecology and Biodiversity.
Institute of Ecology and Biodiversity.Wow, interesting. She has a degree in science with a specialization in biology, a master's degree in ecology and evolutionary biology, both from the University of Chile, a doctorate in biology, and a master's degree in science communication. That master's degree is interesting. And Francisca Lira, Francisca, general manager of Era Sur, a designer and project manager by conviction, with over a decade of experience creating and producing memorable experiences, has dedicated her career to promoting ideas that inspire and transform. And it seems like she gets everyone moving outdoors with a lot of energy thanks to the strategy they implement at Era Sur. And well, they are our guests. So, a big round of applause, please. Thank you very much. [Applause] Okay, this is live radio, so anything can happen. Well, let's talk about science communication. Yes, I'd like you to introduce yourselves. Let's do the exercise of introducing yourselves. We'll have plenty of time, but it's not that much when we have a lot of surprises in store.
Also for the audience
watching and listening. Um, let's
introduce ourselves, but at the same time, I'd like us to
answer two very
simple questions, as simple as you
think I can make them. Ready?
Science communication is democratic, and
what does it mean to democratize that
knowledge? So,
René, please introduce yourself.
Wow.
Let's start off smoothly.
I'll introduce myself. Well,
I'm a director, a producer, but I'm also a
designer. I'm with Fran.
Um, I should also say that those of us
on this panel
constantly cross paths in this ecosystem of
nature communication,
biodiversity communication, and at the same
time, in the generosity that exists between
the world of science and the
people who communicate it, right? So
we're not strangers, and it's a pleasure to be with
all of you.
As a director and producer of
natural history, and to explain right away,
more or less what that is when we talk about
natural history, and also to be
super honest and super respectful
of the past of natural history in
Chile when it emerged, like in the
last 10  Or 15 years making
documentaries, mainly
documentaries for the
international market, which is a
relatively new phenomenon because in Chile
there were many figures who did
natural history, both on
public television, and they also had magazines,
newspapers, etc. I mean, role models.
We had a lot, I think, a long
time ago too, from
Professor Rosa to the land we
live on. I grew up watching Professor
Rosa, who was a character here in Chile,
Leo, difficult to describe. We'll
show you a video
later.
Perfect.
But it was about nature. It's a
Professor Rosa kind of thing, that's why people laugh
here, right? But this new, this new
world of
international communication created a niche for
finding new stories about animals, new
stories about ecosystems for
this great world of streaming, for this
great world of
international productions. We could start
talking about Planet Earth and all those
planets that exist; every year
a new planet comes out, and
the representation of
Chilean nature was very
small. It was very small because many
people here who work in the
field, who are biologists, who  They are
scientists, and
it's difficult
to represent Chilean nature, not just by filming it for
a documentary, not just by taking photographs. There are more and
more tools available, right?
Photography tools, especially cameras, and there's
also greater access. When
we talk about democratization, we're also talking about
access to all these places. But before,
very little was known; they were just anecdotes.
And today, I think, thanks to the
collaborative work with many of you, with
many organizations, and with many people
like the one sitting here,
we constantly collaborate, searching for these
stories and putting them on
platforms for the rest of the world.
We can present them with the voice or
narration of someone like Jeremy Irons or
Pedro Pascal, or someone who generates
marketing, who brings renown, or David
Rattenberg, for those who know him
.
And that, I believe, has been the role not only of
me but of my team for the last 15
years: to take those stories,
then pass them on to people, to
the big Hollywood production companies,
to explain natural history. I don't know
if I have all the answers, right?
No, perfect.  No, of course, there's an absolute
need to amplify all
this information and find
strategies to reach, well, yes,
the vast majority of the population, not
only in Chile, but also abroad.
There's something you mention there that I think is
important, which is that it
also happens to us in Colombia, and it's like realizing
that we were beyond the city
and that there's a very large universe.
And I think that of the countries I've explored a
bit more, it's been Chile, and I find
that there's great biodiversity, that it's
gigantic, that you can find everything, and it's
also incredible to know that these
products exist. So, René,
thank you very much. Let's go here with José. José,
please introduce yourself. Well, something
that's very important in my
biography is that I write books.
I write books for
children. It's my side job, and it's
also part of what I've come to
tell you about today. I'm going to tell you about
some of them, that's why I brought a lot of books
to talk about. I move in the world
more  Editorial. I like the
written word.
This improvisation isn't so easy for me
. I like to be able to reflect on
things, but I'll elaborate
later when we talk a
little more about your initial questions.
I believe, like René, that this—
because I've experienced it firsthand—has been growing.
Today, all the
existing outreach initiatives have been growing, and I
actually feel that I'm more involved in
outreach for conservation,
outreach for biodiversity, rather than purely
scientific outreach. Exactly.
Because that's my focus, but I think
that today it has the potential to
reach very broad audiences because there
are multiple formats, from design,
from audiovisual language,
written language, all the
citizen science platforms, for example,
social media—it's infinite.
I feel that anyone who wants to can
access all that knowledge, all that
outreach.
Some of
the illustrations from the book I'm going to
tell you about are appearing in the background.
But perhaps we still lack the
mechanisms to motivate people to
engage. That's what I can tell you.  That's enough
for now.
Ready? Perfect. No, this is incredible. And
we're in this first moment, right?
We're introducing ourselves. So, let's go
here with Paloma. Paloma, please.
I want to say that I'm never in
this position, that I interview all
these people and I'm always the one holding back the whole time,
but go deeper,
like I have a
terrible impulse. I brought a
short introduction, and basically I wanted to explain,
if you go to the previous one, I think it's
relevant. My name is Paloma Paz,
which explains a lot about my impulses. I'm the
daughter of Orlando, who was a geologist, and
Carmen, who was a sociologist. And
therefore, if there's one thing that has surrounded me my
whole life, it's questions.
And I think that background is
important to understand who one
becomes and the impulses one
has later in professional life, right? If you
go to the next one... Basically, I've
had many paths, I'm a journalist,
many of you may have seen
some of my
television programs as a journalist. It says there, it
's the field where...  You
probably know me better, but I
'm also a director. I've directed
several documentaries, and I also head a
department—I mean, I'm a director in two
exceptions: the
future department of CNN Chile, and I direct
documentaries specifically about
science. I'm a screenwriter; I was a
screenwriting professor for many years, and
I'm generally a creator of
hybrid and hybrid projects, you know?
And throughout my career, I've done
many things to popularize
science. For example,
children's animated series like Locos Lab, where I
also voiced an
animated character,
probably my greatest dream come true
. I've dedicated a lot of time to
journalistic journalism, as I call it,
which is what you've
probably seen on CNN Chile, and it's the
most serious approach, right? I've also made
many documentaries and
documentary series, or series with documentary elements,
like "Por la razón y la ciencia" (For Reason and Science), where
we combined things like Hani
Dueñas's interview with
questions about climate change and
added some animation.  And give it a
different vibe and create a program, right?
Why? Because the idea was to
hack, to hack the barriers or the idea
that science is a privilege for the
few, or that you have to be a
certain way to understand science, and
what better example than a comedian
telling a science story,
right? Um, and on another note, I've been the
director of the campaigns and
outreach strategy for a large
congress called Congreso Futuro (Future Congress).
My team and I worked for many years
designing those
science outreach campaigns.
Um, and I brought this because that's what they
asked me to do, because it seems like I
want to talk a lot, but actually
this was my presentation that they asked me for
, which was five slides. Yes. And I
just want to say, regarding your
question about democracy, that
the democratization of content also has to
do with crossing the line,
crossing the line of what is obviously
a barrier, as is the case with
why, until
five years ago, we still saw scientists as...  From a
doctor's coat to
more concrete issues like connecting
with things that have multiplied
humanity throughout history, which is the
capacity to be amazed, right? And if
we aren't able to connect with impulses
that are in everyone, it's very
difficult to be democratic in
scientific matters. So, I'd say
that's been my great obsession. I don't
even remember if there was another
slide. Ah, this is the most important one,
which is the idea that nothing has to
be purely one thing, but rather to explore
transdisciplinarity and not be so
respectful of what's expected of you.
I think that's extremely important.
Well, thank you very much, Paloma. Uh, let's go
with Neida. Hello
. Hello. Uh, thank you very much for the
invitation. I'm Neli, everyone
calls me Neli. I come from the world
of science, and as Leo was saying
a while ago, I'm the
communications director of a
research institute called IEB, the
Institute of Ecology and Biodiversity,
which is basically a bunch of
scientists who are in
their  respective universities throughout
Chile, and they have
support teams to do things like
technology transfer or
communication, among other things.
So, I lead a group of six
wonderful professionals in
design, communications, and
biology. And we do a little bit of everything.
We do activities, we do workshops,
we do educational programs, we
also make a lot of books. So, just like
Jose, I brought some books that
I and my colleagues have written—oh, I'm forgetting
some for children, others for adults, and
so on. So, if you want them, well, I do
n't know if we'll have time, but we
can try. And about your question
regarding democracy, I think that, like
any tool, it can be
used for good or for
evil, for democracy or for
fascism. And the surveys on the
social perception of science and technology in
Chile show that there is a lot of interest among
people, more than we thought.
The myth that people weren't
interested in science has been shattered, but
we also see the barriers; we see that the
interest is quite widespread, it interests
men, women, the poor, the rich, from
Santiago and from elsewhere, but  What isn't
universal is access. And the only
group of people who say, "I'm
interested in science and I know where
to find it, I know what
TV programs to watch, I know what books to read, I know
what websites to search for, are wealthy men
from Santiago." So, the problem is
there, it's mapped out. We have three
surveys that surely cost
the government a fortune, where
our mission is clear. So, access is a
matter of much more than simply
making materials available. That's a
first step, but we should never
be satisfied with "I've already written a
book," "I've already done this," "the
program has aired," because access goes much,
much further than that. There are formats that
simply intimidate people
because they aren't used to them, because it's not
part of their cultural background, and that's
something we also have to
address, I think. There.
Okay, very good.
Francisca, welcome to
this radio table. Thank you for the
invitation. We, as ERA Sur—I
represent Ladera Sur at this moment—and we have been an
active part of this great
gathering, and we are very happy
as it has been.  It's been done and thought through.
Ah, look, uh, can we show this
video right away, then,
yes? Uh, give me a second, give me a second
here, master, master, let's wait for
her to introduce herself and then we'll go to
the part where we'll show the
content. So, everything's good.
Well,
introduce yourself
however you tell me, I'm obedient.
So, if I talk a little about myself, I
come from the world of design, as
René was saying, we were university classmates and
I focused a lot on
experience design, since I felt that
when people live things and
experience them firsthand, that's
where they connect the most. I also feel that's
how the emotion is generated. I
love creating encounters, building
networks, and that's how
I've been at Ladera Sur for 4 years now, which is celebrating its
10th anniversary today, not today, today, this year, 10 years
at Ladera Sur. Very nice. And well, La
ERA Sur
has tried to democratize this content a bit
. We draw from a great  We have a
community of contributors who
provide us with all the information,
scientific content,
illustrations, and photography, and we try
to democratize it, to use your
word, in different formats.
We have our main platform, which is our
communication channel, where we're
always delivering content. We've developed
podcasts, infographics, and
published books, and four years ago we created the
La Sur Festival, which is where I get involved
in creating this in-person event,
where I think we also reach
another audience. Our idea with the
festival is to reach a
slightly more mainstream audience, perhaps by including
music and content so that
someone who isn't interested in
whales or ecosystems or
biodiversity per se might come for
another reason and take away a
message. So, that's a
brief overview of what...
Well, a big round of applause, please, for
this panel, for these
guests.
Okay, let's put a
separator there, please, and we'll be right back.
www.ravolution.org Today [Applause] [Music] with the people present and the living cultures, traveling is something else. Travolution Radio. [Music] Well, we're back on the air here on Travolution Radio. Listen, we're here at the biodiversity meeting. Uh, truly an incredible space. We've had two intense days of preparation, also from the Travolution teams, from Colab, from here at the research center of the Faculty of Engineering. It's been quite arduous work, and the beautiful thing is to see and reach this point and consolidate after all these voices and experiences, and hopefully next year we can have many more people, it will be much bigger because this is the agenda, this is the agenda we need. This morning we did a small radio roundtable and we were saying, listen, we need to talk about this. We need to talk not only here in Chile, not only here in Santiago, we also need to decentralize, move to other territories, move to other places, and their presentations were incredible. We want  Look, we want substance, right?
Like in Colombia. Here it is. Uh, what kind of
broth did the gentleman have yesterday
? Uh, sir, yesterday you
had some soup, some broth, didn't you?  Right?  What's the
name of that broth you drank?
The casserole dish, well we don't have a
casserole dish, sancocho too, but it's very
similar.  Yesterday, I saw it and I
was saying, "Wow, that would be delicious to try."  Last night
at dinner we are here with one of the
colleagues attending and in that
casserole and in that stew we want to see
the work that these people have been doing here
.  So, we enter here into the
power of language and formats.  We're going
to watch a video of René, and
then we'll talk based on that video, and then
each of us will show something of what we've been
doing.  So, master,
please, let's watch this first video.
He failed.   It's
silent.  Sound.
What would this sound like?
Can I sing or play the flute?  Yes,
yes, yes.  A little flute.  That.
Okay, let's see what's up
, but while
we're fixing the sound problem, I'll
explain a little bit.
Uh,
can I put it at the beginning?
Yes, we can again.
This is to inspire us now for what's to
come, to show you a little bit of Chile.  And
this is actually a project that I
'll tell you about later because it's
there.  Of course.
[Music]
Well, while we wait for that, let's
say hello to the people who are
listening to us.
We're here helping the people who
are listening to us on the radio.  We are
resolving a sound issue here in the
auditorium of the Aula Magna.
And doing this live stream isn't so easy,
huh, for the listeners who are
tuning in.
Well, we had to whistle, nothing else to do.
Well, what I wanted to tell you, uh,
we can run the images anyway.
Yes, we can run while
we figure out what's going on.
Well, when we're making
natural history documentaries,
I want to delve a little deeper into what we
normally do when looking for stories.
We as a team have a team
here in Chile that consists of
Chile.
This wasn't planned, was it?
Land of contrasts
[Applause]
where color is life.
A long, narrow strip of land at the
end of the world, where nature used the entire color palette
to paint our country and the
living beings that inhabit it.
[Applause]
Beyond beauty, colors
hide mysteries
[Applause]
secrets of nature.  the reasons
for the existence and survival of
many species.
Color is art, but also
evolution, adaptation, and strategy.
[Music]
The nature of Chile in colors, from
the perspective of its
wild creatures, many of them seriously
threatened in their conservation.
How fragile everything is.   It
trembles and falls.
And here we are again.
A glass castle.
[Applause]
Every color has a reason.  Every detail
in a coat.  Each
contrasting shade in a blue or green sea,
each eye,
each feather, some of those feathers.   Female
travelers who travel thousands of
kilometers to get here to our
country.
The red of our blood,
our passion, the heart that gives us
life,
the immense blue of our ocean, and the
mysteries yet to be revealed.  Agua, hielo
y criaturas desconocidas.
The green of hope.  A light of
survival for the planet.
[Applause] Yellow, desert and steppe, color of resilience, a new dawn, [Music] the white of our powerful protective mountain range and all the living beings that take refuge here.
And the black one, where we see the adventures and
sacrifices of a team fighting for what they
love, raising awareness in all
those who feel the call of the
colors of nature in Chile.
[Music]
Our country, our ecosystems,
our animals resisting and fighting
day by day for the survival of their
species.
A world of colors, a natural world.
Chile, a chromatic country.
[Applause]
[Music]
Chile, a country with color.
[Music] It was
heard there.  It was relevant.  Well,
that video has revolved around a couple of events
from the Blue Era a while ago
because that's how a project starts.  We have
a lot of images that are meant to
motivate us to see what we
have in Chile, and it looks beautiful. And
finally, I think the documentary
has the nature aspect to
make it attractive.
What we do is try to put it in that place where it shines, where it looks beautiful, but without a story, without a narrative, it's boring, right?  It's boring.
So, this story started with the
idea of ​​doing something about the colors of
Chile two years ago, and two projects
are coming out of this one, which is why I wanted to
share it with
you. One of these projects is
specifically about
nature, about animal behavior.
Each of these images is
work we've done for years in
different places, on different shoots,
taking a lot of pictures from different points, but showing
an animal standing on a branch doesn't
work.
It is that animal with a
specific behavior doing something specific,
hopefully something surprising.
We are doing a format on that side
called a narrative called
Blue Tipp, which is the most classic format
of natural history.
But on the other hand, and this is where I want to focus, we have a story that I can't talk much about, but it's a movie and a movie with a character of international relevance that has to do with music, but it has to do with colors.  So, from an idea that was born
about the colors of nature,
two different projects emerge.
But the second project, which is where
a person appears, and that's where I want to
stop and focus, uh, and
here I also want to be super self-critical
and be a little uh honest also with
the subject of nature and
documentaries.  There is a major
international crisis.
Although we have been working externally for a long time
, at the moment
production is lower, fewer
productions are being made because the
format has been somewhat overused.
Nico Lago was speaking before
the Pumas.  Nico came to Torres del
Pain to work with us, he
accompanied us the first time Nico went
there with the Pumas and Nico has been
doing a great job with the Pumas
for a long time.  He's no longer
necessarily working on
documentaries with us.  But
how many Puma sequences have you
seen that come out all the time?
Puma documentaries.  We were just talking
with Meli, a friend, and it's like there are at
least 40 sequences of Puma, of
which we have been
involved, I don't know, in 30, and it gets
repetitive and I think it has lost
the surprise factor, it
loses the impact factor, it
also loses the narrative
and story factor, and it also happens that it becomes
a formula and a
sausage factory.  So in England what
they say is, like, in the next
BBC series, or whoever, we have to
have puma, just like we have to
have lions or llen, right?  And they repeat
the same story of the mother who has to
hunt to feed her cubs
and kill a guanaco and blah blah blah, but
in the end it starts to lose relevance, the
message starts to lose power and it
starts to become somewhat repetitive.  While it
has a very positive side, which is something we can
perhaps delve into further at
another time, perhaps you discussed it
yesterday, or maybe you'll
discuss it today, the Puma is alive today, a
live Puma is worth more than a
dead Puma, right?  And that has been a
direct benefit of tourism, photography,
and documentaries that give an
animal a value that brings
economic activity to the place.  Now, there are
other issues about how to control it or
do it responsibly.  That's another
part, but
in terms of the message, in terms of
what one is showing, there is an
industry-level crisis of repeating the
formula, and that's where the
most important thing appears: coexistence with
humans.  And that's the focus I
mentioned when human stories appear
in relation to nature.  And
there we have an example of what happened with
the Octopus Teacher, who
ended up winning an Oscar.  It wasn't a
story.  La Pipa was here at the
festival last year.  Pipa Elrich, the
director who is a friend of ours.  We were just
in Colombia with Pipa, actually
working with indigenous communities.
Pipa didn't make a documentary to win
an Oscar, but Pipa came to renew the
format of nature documentaries
by putting a
human story in relation to nature front and center, which
is what happens to all of us.  That's what
happens, it happens to our children
when they look out the window and see something, they
go to the hill, because that's how the world is.
The world is not made up of pristine,
wild places where we're going to see this animal
that a human has never seen.  And those are
the stories where we need to
focus.  And while
the story of this diver in
relation to that octopus was found in the octopus master, that story
could very well be the story of
any of you, of a scientist,
of a park ranger, of an
artisanal fisherman.  And that's the focus, I think,
nowadays, of what
nature documentaries are, and that's also where the
importance of the message lies.
Well, all this
information is interesting.  Hey, you've got me
thinking a lot, but
time in radio is very expensive,
and even more so in community radio
.  And in Colombia I remember very well that
once they made the only great documentary
about wildlife, about fauna, all of this, they brought in
a team from outside as if we didn't
have the capacity to do it ourselves
. Yes, total wild magic.  And all the
jaguar shots were taken in the
same place.  Even a biologist friend
told me, "The same jaguar
is the same jaguar in every
shot, but they make it seem
magical, obviously, through audiovisual means, because it's
difficult to actually document a
jaguar in the wild. But well, it's
part of that process, and what
you're saying is quite interesting, as is the
overexposure of images and
content. What does it imply? I don't know if it's
the decrease in sensitivity later on, when you're
watching that
content, right? It's not the same as
going to live the experience, and that happens a
lot with community tourism,
with sustainable tourism. I go to
a territory, and at the beginning,
we show something about a project in
Colombia, which is the
Jaguar Corridor. You never actually go to see the jaguar, you
never actually see the jaguar, but you know that's
the jaguar's path. You know that
the jaguar passes by there every day, and
just walking along that
path makes you say, 'Wow,
this is impressive.' So, you don't have to go
looking for the  to be, but to see how the community
relates to this
living spirit and how they try to achieve what is
called peace and
reconciliation with nature, with
that other part of nature, right? And
I think that in that exercise
of exploration, José has been
doing some illustration work, she was saying,
right? And you brought
some illustrations, you brought some books
here. Let's see the illustrations.
José brought a very
beautiful book. So, without further ado,
José, tell us about this beautiful work you've been
doing.
Yes, it's clear, as they asked us to
frame the questions, right?
Or the conversations, in
specific cases. We at the
Chilco Foundation have been working on this book for about four years.
It took a long time, and it has a
kind of prequel. It has
a book that you may have seen because
Contrapunto published an edition that has
been in many bookstore windows,
which was made in Scotland because it was
It was coordinated by the Edinburgh Botanic Garden with artists from Turkey about Chilean flora from the southern forests and was printed in Belgium. It was a mix of skills and interests. And now we wanted to do a second part, which is about the endemic flora of Mediterranean Chile, and we wanted to do it this time with Chilean artists, or local artists, as you can see here. There are 10 artists, and each of them has their own style. This diversity is also reflected in the different illustrations, and that's interesting, I think, because it's not a book where everything has to be super rigid and everything has to be the same. Of course, there's a format, but above all, we wanted that sensitivity of the artists to be reflected in the composition. The technique was always watercolor, and we asked for, for example, flower dissections. These illustrations are botanical; they're very informative, and I'm often asked, "But why do botanical illustrations that take so much time?" Some of these illustrations took the...  Pua alpestris,
which is this blue pua, the one
outside, Constanza Ova spent a
year illustrating it because they have to
follow the entire life cycle and because they have to
capture it from live specimens.
We also asked that it not be based
on photographs.
So, well, it's a project that
takes a lot of time and requires
a confluence of knowledge.
From, of course, who makes the
initial lists? It's a selection of 51
species that were assigned to
different artists, and also, well,
I'm looking at the book cover there,
we made an innovation in the
more classic botanical illustration, which is the
plant in isolation,
but here we wanted to
include some of the
organisms with which they are
generally related in some of the plates. Of course, there are birds, insects, but there are
also mammals, and there's also a
fungus, a len, and a liverwort that
was super important for us to include.
And little by little, and I want that to become more and more present in
the
production of the books we make.
But well, the point is that I  I wanted to
focus on the word diversity,
because this requires diversity of
knowledge, diversity of style, and it's
also
a dynamic project.
People ask me, "Okay, but why do you make
these books so big, so super-sized
?"
But it requires a diversity of
formats to reach
different audiences, and it's a long road. So
, of course, we're starting with this
edition, but there will be
lower-cost editions, and we're also
working with a course in the
Master's program in Landscape Architecture
on an essay, an academic exercise
to translate into an exhibition. There,
the students will not only
write essays about the species,
but they will also create their
own representations of these
species. And that's how
the project, which began with this
selection of species and
this intention, grows and transforms. It continues, it
has a long road ahead, and it will keep
evolving, and I want to
emphasize that because it has its own timing, its own
dynamics, and it requires that
diversity of perspective.
Well,  I find it fascinating, I've
always found
scientific illustration fascinating, illustration in general,
but it seems even more beautiful when you
also manage to get children to engage with the
drawing process.
Yes, no, sorry, that's why I just
remembered, that's why I don't like to
improvise. I asked myself a
question and didn't answer it. Why
Botanical Illustration, see your photography?
Oh, yes. Well
, it's the capture of the
amount of information
captured on a plate, which is very
precise, very informative,
and it requires an
approach from the artist that is very
similar to the approach a scientist takes to a species, an
object of study,
because you spend a lot of time with that
plant and that creates a bond that perhaps does
n't happen when you have a
more instantaneous connection like
photography. With this, I don't mean to say that
photography doesn't have its place. I
love photography, but
botanical illustration is
also important because it speaks to us of those
times, and because it's
very beautiful in the end. You see it and you  It
moves you, and when you see this plant
illustrated, and maybe later you see it in
person, it's like you're
meeting
someone important, someone you were
introduced to, someone who... I don't know... wow,
like that. At the same time, in person, it's as if it
were someone familiar. That's why
we like to do this.
A good portrait of these species.
Of course. And what you're saying is clear. I think
René also faces the challenge of
seeing, I don't know, any natural species
from his canvas, which in this case
is a sensor, but it's the camera. So,
how do you approach seeing it here
through illustration? Well, ultimately there's
an interpretation of that being, and I think it's given
justice in the formats, and
that's what we're seeing: how you
can explore those ways of
feeling and thinking. And that's
beautiful. I'm in front of another being, and
that being sits there, and I can
talk to it like the
old portrait photographers did, asking how you want the
photograph, how the light works best
, you see?  Um, how do I know what makes
your texture look best? So, you're
finally deciphering a character. In this case,
we're talking about these
beautiful plants, and I find this
cover magnificent, don't you? The
relationship between the hummingbird
there,
conversing, dialoguing, it's there, it's
there, and those absences—when you saw them
reading books as a child, you'd say,
"Yes, that's an isolated cactus, and
who does the cactus interact with?" Yes,
until you start to understand. And
I think there's something really beautiful happening,
and I find it gorgeous. A
big round of applause, please,
for José. We're still here at
www.travolution.org,
here at this
biodiversity meeting, Paloma. Well, I have a
question for you.
We're looking at these formats here, and I
wanted to know what responsibility they
have. Oh, no, I'll go with this one.
What formats? Which formats or
strategies have been most effective
for you?  Or have you worked to reach the public to disseminate these topics? Yes, you've probably explored several and said, "Look, this type of format has definitely worked for us, or for me." Tell us a little about your experience with this. Let's see, uh, [Applause] the surprise. Oh, well. How are you? Welcome to this space, Out of Time, an unlikely experiment that we decided to conduct between different institutions. A few months ago, we began training an artificial intelligence with all the bibliography, thoughts, and letters that Charles Darwin wrote during his life. Thanks to that, we have been able to create a unique space today, a conversation in 2023 with this great thinker and scientist, Darwin, who continues to be so important to the history of humanity. Now we are going to begin this conversation, and you will be privileged witnesses to a unique event, a milestone in the development of human evolution, in which, thanks to machine learning, thanks to artificial intelligence, thanks to the level of machine evolution that we have...
Having reached this point, we are now in a
position for you to see
Charles Darwin's first television interview.
Thank you, Darwin, for us.
Earlier, when I summarized everything I could,
all the formats I had used in the
previous presentation—and there are
indeed many ways, and I
couldn't tell you which is the best because
each one goes in a
different direction—this point, which I felt was
important to mention because I didn't
mention it before in all the others, is about
experimenting. Today, for all of
you, this might be more familiar in
artificial intelligence because it's
much more readily available, and so on. In that year, we
humans didn't even have
direct access to GPT chat at that time.
That way of doing this interview with Darwin
used GPT as a basis when GPT
wasn't available to people, and
therefore it was incredibly revolutionary.
We asked ourselves, for example,
if Darwin were here today, and we brought him back to life,
how would we explain
climate change to him, the mess it created? How do we explain it
to someone who hasn't
imagined, who has never seen that
reality? How do we explain it to that person?
Imagine what climate change is like
today, huh? And it's captured in the way we
asked Darwin, and Darwin
answered us like, "Hey, that would be
a bigger mess, basically, you know?" And he
talks about the chain
of disasters that it would produce based
on his knowledge, which is in fact what
has happened. So, it's very
interesting that we don't put any
kind of limits on the need to
tell a story, because, look,
this interview was broadcast
all over the world; nothing
like this had been done before. We were contacted by
media outlets from unusual places around the
world to talk about this.
And at other times, we've asked other
questions and
answered them in other ways through
these animations. For example, what does
an animation need to have so that it's
not paternalistic,
tedious, and something children don't want to
watch? How do you integrate something that
is interesting for children into a narrative
that does deliver values ​​and content
necessary for climate change, and the
same for adults? I mean, for
example, today  Talking about nature
is so devalued.
And these days, to talk about nature, you
have to talk about the economy. So, it
also has to do with understanding where
we stand, what context we're in,
to deliver this kind of message. And
of course, you can't deliver that
message in a school in the same way, as
Nelida was saying, right? It's extremely
important that we understand that you
can't speak to children the same way.
So, solidarity, generosity
with the audience, and above all, empathy
to see how what we want to
say has value for the person in
front of it. I think that's it.
Thank you very much. And precisely in that
exercise, in that construction, well, there's
a great challenge there for the
media, right? Well, it's no
secret, and I think it's
a good scenario too.
How are you? Welcome to
this space outside of time, an
improbable experiment where
information flows and information flows.
How is that work, especially
regarding the responsibility of...
How do the media construct these narratives? I mean, I'm lucky to be in a media outlet that has never talked so much about nature. And the reason this has happened is because there's been a group of obsessive people within the media, like myself and our team, who have pushed this agenda forward. I mean, it's not easy at all, especially today, given how much this exacerbation of polarization has hurt the world, and how the conversation about nature has become something superficial, like, wow, identity politics, I don't know what, anti-development, and so on, right? You can add all the lists of things to that list, because suddenly it's become a political act, and it takes a lot of courage to raise these issues. So, it's becoming increasingly difficult to sell this agenda in the media. We're truly fortunate that we conquered this space a while ago. CNN's futures division has been around for eight years, and we've produced thousands and thousands of pieces of content. People already kind of assume we're going to talk about this, but for  The
rest of the media is finding it
increasingly difficult to raise these agendas, and
therefore, I think what we need to
do is maintain the
momentum and return to
empathy.
Because environmentalists
fare poorly if we continue fighting alone and only
head-on. I think it's
important to present the environmental agenda
from a global perspective, from
common sense, from what resonates with people,
and with political tactics and
strategy, in the same way
that this agenda has been made to
disappear with the same tactics, but
in reverse.
Yes, I agree. And I come from a
country where the vast majority of
environmental leaders live in
territories with abundant resources, and they are
disappearing in the many ways
one can imagine making
a living being disappear. And that's happening
today. And it's not only happening in
Colombia; it's happening here in Chile, in
Argentina, in Guatemala.
Leaders who disappear. Why? For
showing and defending the
resources, or for defending their own backyard,
for the right to...  The puma can pass, because of
the right of the panther to be out
there, the jaguar to pass, and because of that same
right to express themselves, to speak, to have an
opinion,
unfortunately, they don't have the
possibility of communicating, they don't have it,
they have to create their own means. If
the mainstream media aren't publicizing
that, if they aren't showing it, there's a
great responsibility, or else I can't
do it. And it's a matter of a
second. Today I'm here facing
my community, but the next day I'm not here,
I've disappeared. That's the reality
there. And well, what
you're saying about that
professional responsibility
of how to defend these positions is important, especially in
these critical times we're living in here
in Latin America, in the world.
We'll continue here, a round of applause,
please, here for Paloma. Thank you.
We're still here on Travolution Radio. Listen,
we have a great audience. Very good. I'm very
happy that the people here
are watching us. Listen, that clock is
ticking, it's  Running, and we're even going
this way. Uh, let's go with Neli.
I hope I learned
your name well. Uh, Neli, let's talk a
little about art, right? How art
can enhance these kinds of
spaces for dissemination,
information, or communication, from a
scientific perspective, from biodiversity,
right? And how can we
generate those emotional connections through art
? A little while ago,
you were even talking about
how I can
touch a nerve to generate
genuine interest and get closer to that
topic. So, how does art, which is a
topic you've been working on, bring
us closer to that
? I want to revisit some words
my colleagues have said here:
experience, empathy, emotion—that's what
art does, and that's the
emotional connection we need to
keep fostering, because I think the
biggest problem we have is a
total disconnection from others. We
see it in the...  Families, disconnection between
parents and children, disconnection between
adult children and their
elderly parents, disconnection between
rich and poor, political disconnection. What
hope do we have of ever
connecting with a monkey in the mountains?
I see it as part of a
much larger crisis of disconnection,
exacerbated by the fast
pace of city life. In Chile, almost
90% of people live in
urban environments, and that's like being in
Luxembourg. It's terrible.
How can we expect to
understand, at a heart level, that we depend on
a tree, on a little creature
in the soil decomposing
matter, on a fungus? Lettuce
comes from the supermarket, after all. It's almost
impossible. And in that sense, one of the
questions we were asked had to
do with the challenges, and for me, the
main challenge is promoting more
experiences, as Fran mentioned here,
getting people out into nature. And that
's not easy at all. In fact, I feel that
medicine is only just beginning to
understand this.  This, giving prescriptions, as well as,
"Okay, take four antibiotics and
spend half an hour a day for a week in
a park, don't even go to a
national park that nobody has access to in
this country, very few people, the
privileged, no more.  So, if
medicine is starting to get that
shock, let's say, what about
municipalities, schools?  In other words,
taking people out of nature
should not be, in addition to all the
beautiful things we do, ever instead
of.  So, in that context,
why is art so important?
Because it promotes this whole more
emotional connection with the other person.  Y cuando la Jose
estaba hablando con los ojitos que le
brillaban sobre la ilustración
naturalista y yo he visto a la gente
hacer la ilustración, ¿no es cierto?  We've seen it
, I'm not an artist, but
Jose is, but we've seen it and the
attention it requires makes you
connect with that other person.
It doesn't matter that it's a plant, that you don't know how that plant speaks or thinks, that it surely does speak and think, but spending a whole year looking at it and drawing it and seeing how it changes, what happens with this light, with this other light, connects you on a personal level.  And that's what I believe we need to be
promoting in terms of
experiences.  And I have to go, but I
wanted to mention this project here.
Come on, let's go.   This is
a project we are doing
together with Parquemet, which depends
on the Ministry of Housing and Urban Development,
which manages many of the
urban parks here in Santiago.
This project is called Ruta Nativa, we started it 4 years ago, it's with older adults and we have two objectives, one, well, we want to talk about nature obviously with these people.  But what
interests us most is their overall well-being
.  We start by thinking about the
audience, what they need and what
we can give them, instead of what I
want to say, which is like the classic
approach from science, but rather
what those audiences need from
us.  So yes, we want to share
environmental knowledge, about threats and
especially about the richness of
central Chile, which is the most
biologically rich point in all of
Chile and nobody knows it.  And on the other hand,
well, tools for
holistic well-being.  So, every
year along with environmental education
we do art workshops.
Different themes every year.  The first year
was textile art, the second year mosaic,
the third year ceramics.
This year we're embroidering, and in those conversations that happen after we've talked, we stop talking about plants, animals, and fungi when we start sewing, gluing, or whatever. That's when all the fun conversations come out, the knowledge that these people bring, right?  When I was a kid there were
more foxes and my dad, I don't know what, and
they started sharing and a gigantic wealth came out
.
And since we also wanted to test whether this really worked or if it was just a kind of hippie thing we felt like doing, we measured it from the beginning.
We have hired
social science professionals to see how
the overall well-being of people is improving, or not,
in addition to
environmental knowledge.  And we have seen
extremely positive changes, and this has also been
reinforced for us by the
social workers at the foundation
with whom we work.  And also,
to measure these advances,
we have kept logs for two consecutive years where
older people write, write
letters to animals, draw
themselves in nature,
and well, among other things.  So, we
can also use it as an
assessment tool.  I didn't get around to that; we
also had a video of the program, but it didn't even
occur to me to send it, did it?  My brain
doesn't think in audiovisual terms,
unlike my colleagues here, but we
also have a little video.  Uh, that's what
I wanted to tell you about one of the
projects where we mix
environmental education and art and why we think it
works.
Oh, that's amazing.  Very beautiful.  Look, here I am taking a look at this book, it's called, let's see, Invasions of Habitat Usurpers, the Threats of Invasive Species.
This exercise is beautiful,
this exercise is especially beautiful for bringing closer what
you're saying about other ages,
right?  Well, I'm part
of another project we do:
community radio with boys and girls. We
also find that when we arrive in
communities, older people
approach the radio because radio
was a very important space, and
in some places it still is.
They come to the
radio wondering if they can speak or give their
opinion.  Can I
grab the microphone?  Because they feel
closer to it than even the
YouTube video and all that.  Grandparents
get very close to the dial, don't they?  Uh, and
to find oneself in those audiences, right?  How do
we reach those audiences?  How do we
get there, to that territory, and
sit down to what you're talking about, from
drawing and painting?  The grandfather, the
grandmother, the boy, the girl arrive, they arrive and
we finally begin to create a common
unity there, working there, there is what I do
n't know, the living classrooms are there in
the territory.  Wow, very nice work,
beautiful.  Where?
I know you have to leave now, but the people who are listening to us, who are watching us, can find you to get more information.  Well, you can follow us on
all our social media networks IEB GU-
Chile.  Uh, we sell most of our books
through the wonderful
Libro Verde bookstore, which distributes
throughout Chile.  That's it,
Neli, thank you very much.  A big round of applause
for Neli, please.  That
work is incredible.  Thank you, thank you, thank you.
And well, we're still here, master.  So, let's watch
a video and we'll be back with
Fran.  Let's watch this video that
Fran brought us right here.  to
share.
[Applause]
[Music]
[Laughter]
[Applause]
dewa.
If you knock on the door, ma'am, it's me.  If there's a
knock at the door, ma'am, it's me.  I've come to say
goodbye, I'm leaving tomorrow.  It's the same as
asking me tomorrow
if we'll play
[Applause]
so we can live so far apart.
And the land will not want to.
If there is one world, it belongs to everyone.
We will all live together.
I must admit that at Travolution we are
the Era Sur Lovers.  We love the
content from Era Sur.
Well, we've followed it, we've experienced it, and we understand that there's a commitment, a strong commitment, especially Fran, you who have been working for years in experience design, which is a topic that you're passionate about, but above all this festival in Ea Sur, right?  Uh,
we talked a little while ago, I mean,
just before Fan Neli, about this
classroom thing, about how we built it there.  I believe
that a festival is also a good space
for dissemination, it is also a good
space for experimentation.  So,
tell us what those
important elements are for making this festival
a great and memorable experience, and
how to bring communities and
people closer to all these topics.
Look, I think that, as you rightly say
,
the festival should be considered as being
born
for a community, perhaps a
community of the southern ERA, basically of
followers and nature lovers
that already existed.  I always emphasize that,
fundamentally, it was about creating a
face-to-face event for an audience
that we had already mapped out. I think there's an added
benefit there,
where we had measured and
were able to... although Festival 1 was a
total experiment, we had no idea if it was going to
be a success or a failure.
We had a loyal community that
was eager to see each other physically; it was
like we knew each other
virtually.
Well, depending on how people were reading us, what content
had more or less reach, appeal,
interest, but we think it was like,
we felt obligated to
do it in the end, right?  And why?
Because, what is the force you're talking about,
the Ladera Sur festival?  It is a meeting of
knowledge, of people, it is generating the
face-to-face community and as Laera Sur
we use our expertise a little
, as I said before, so that
others can shine or so that others
can tell their stories.  What was the
idea?  The invention was like a
content festival where at the
festival there were three or two stages,
I think, now there are six, but so
that other people could speak, that is, so that
the experts could speak, those who
know, those who are on the front line
in environmental struggles, in the
protection of ecosystems.  So
they were the ones who had to
speak, and we, as ERA Sur,
provided them with the platform to do so.
I think important elements are, as has been
said here,
we believe that culture as such
or art was also something super
important.  We in the southern era have
always taken great care in
developing as an aesthetic.  We believe that raising
awareness, as José rightly said
, is what moves people.  I mean, I watch
René's video and it moves me, even though I
've seen it many times.  It's also a
very beautiful thing to see.  I see
Jose's illustrations and it's like, I really
want more people to see it.  I see
how the dove interviews its people or
asks questions to the core when
people are showing their content,
and it's like, how I want
more people to see this.  So I think
minute one is about lifting up and making
public, through our platform,
those who are always there
working for nature.  Two
connecting through aesthetics, through what
excites at the festival.  You go in
and you have experiences ranging from these
giant sculptures that appeared there,
which people can take photos of, to
simple things like a
climbing wall, a skate ramp, a
Millwaki forest plantation, and
well, and we believe that the most important and
smartest thing we did
was also how to include content that isn't
for the convinced ones, deep down, the
forest people.  O sea, lo que decimos
que si seguimos solamente metiendo eh
flora, fauna, funga como tema central,
eh vamos a van a ir los que les interesa
esto.  So, I think it
was a great goal for us to score against Los Jaivas, for
example.  So, people who went to see
Los Jaivas were left with a message of
protection.  I don't know if I'm answering your
question, but that's kind of what we
wanted to do with the festival, which, having
said that, is an opportunity for connection and
networking. It
started to transform into an
annual meeting for an ecosystem that
works on nature issues throughout the year,
and it has been
evolving. Now, with the
fourth edition of the festival coming up, there's a
new innovation:
Friday is Ecosystem Day,
which is where we're
also bringing in the corporate world,
brands too. It's
important to introduce
biodiversity into
corporate environments, to try to get them to make it a
central pillar of their
businesses.  So, we're
putting together some new dynamics to see if they work for us
.
Wait, you're missing something, Fran,
please help me.  You're the expert.
You forgot to mention the little market.
Of course, it's super important because it's like
an economy.
Of course, that's not the case.  Thank you, friend.
At the heart of the festival itself,
you support people who are
working, and you also have a world
of 200 entrepreneurs who are there,
selling everything from
botanical illustration posters,
beautiful t-shirts, books, second-
hand clothes, jewelry, cosmetics, everyone,
and of course, being close to
Christmas this year, even more so.  So,
buying local, buying smart also
goes there, and of course, in the world of
environmental NGOs, there is this fair, a
fair that we say has about 80 NGOs that
are there talking, and people go and
naturally come to learn about the
things that the NGOs themselves are doing
.
That.
Wow, impressive.  Uh, I haven't
yet had the opportunity to be at the
La Era Sur festival.  I've seen the
content, I've seen a lot of
everything, I mean, almost every day the
first thing that pops up for me, and I'm serious, is
something like a post from the Southern Era, I'm always
looking at it.  And there will be
a
Latin American side at some point, because you already have
content moving in Latin America.
Will there be a branch in Colombia, Brazil,
or Argentina?
No, they've suddenly thought about it, yes, we've thought about that a lot, I mean, in fact, the same, but I think that's also the basis of what we're saying, what I started by saying, this was a festival for a community that existed.  We know,
and it happens to us a lot, that we have
tried—and there is our first
step—to leave Santiago as well as
trying to decentralize the
festival itself. It's not easy, I mean, to
put together this monster, and we are also
putting together a bit of it. There is now the South
, the South Latin America, which doesn't
just give news from Chile, but
also to outside to create a community and
start to get to know the audiences
there.  We too don't
want to arrive in Colombia and show them
our festival as if we were
experts at doing it.  We,
again, as I say, if we are going to
Colombia, to Peru, to Mexico, we want the
local people to be the protagonists as well.
I mean, I think that's where the value lies, the value of the Southern Era.  When Martin invented the
Surr Era,
I was going to build a network of collaborators on my
own, right?  I mean, I think that's like the
great lesson of
nature.  Ecosystems are
diverse.  Each one learns from the
different things that are
rising, the symbiosis between species.
So, like Ladera Sur, it
tries to replicate that as much as possible.   In other words
, and this is also true with the communities, and
since we also want everyone to
contribute from their different perspectives
, if we are going to go out there we
first have to have something
consolidated that we are currently building.
So
I can add some of the blue one.   Feel free to comment if you
wish.   It
turns out that in the end, Era Sur is our
home, it's the home of all of us who
have worked with nature for 10 years, and there's
always an open door with Era
Sur.  When someone wants to communicate
something, they communicate with the blue era, and the
blue era is always willing to amplify
messages that are important.
So in the end, all of that also
generates a sense of reciprocity
.  If we can get
something for the South EA and I mean
us, Jose, Paloma, whoever, it
always works for both sides and I
think that's what has built the
blue era.
And what that festival did was bring all these people together, celebrate them, let them get to know each other, and ultimately, nature benefits in many ways as well.  I think a
lot of people have come out with projects from
people who met there, a lot of
people have also grown in terms of their
organizations and it's like a home, I
define it that way, right?  We're
friends, really.  How nice.   I
'm taking pictures of Fran that will
appear on the Era
Surde Instagram account.
Excellent.
Well, it's the house.  So, how
wonderful it would be to incorporate these themes
from community tourism, from
nature tourism, which here at
Travolution, more than 10 years working
not only in Colombia, but also here in
Chile, the work of effort,
national meetings with different
indigenous communities.  I think there's
also potential there to bring us closer together
.  I believe that we need to flirt in
these scenarios and in these spaces.  And they gave me
00 there. Wow,
impressive.  This thing really flies.
We're going to wrap this up.  Uh, we had a
lot of things planned here, but we're going
to wrap things up now.  Uh, I'm going to
announce to the people who are still
connected and listening to us on
www.travolution.org
RG and watching us on the
stream.  Uh, the people here in
the audience, after this
radio table, after this space here,
we are going to present, uh,
we are going to do a documentary screening
that unfortunately will not be able to be seen
on the streaming due to rights issues,
but you can see it on HBO, so
after this closing you will be
able to see it.  Hey, look for it around there.
You can try it anyway.
Um, I think I think YouTube is going to
tell us, like, stop there, you
could try,
we could try a little bit, a
little bit, a little bit
so they don't take down the content,
because here we also have the issue of
taking care of this great
broadcast of today, a year in
nature, an extraordinary series from Patagonia
.
René will introduce her to us here in a little while.  Okay, let's wrap this up
, we've already finished this,
but look, I think something that
started with this drawing
, this video, the Jaguar, is
because at Travolution we have walked through
different communities that have a
great need for dissemination and that are
motivated to create their own media.
When it comes down to grabbing the
camera, grabbing the video, grabbing the
illustration, that is, these tools
that we are talking about here.
So, as a way of
inviting you to do something
based on the work you've been doing
for those communities, tomorrow I'm going to
start receiving messages from
communities that are seriously listening to us
in Latin America.  Well, these
messages even reach citizens who seek to
spread the word.  What message can you give
to motivate you?  that
suddenly they're there with a camera, they're there
with a microphone, and I want to do something.
Uh, this came from Costa Rica,
you know?  There's something there.  Those of you who
are involved in this on a daily basis, what
can we offer to these people who are
there waiting to create content,
waiting to report what is happening
in their territories?  René, you from
photography, audiovisual.
First, a shout-out to the big guy with the mustache in the
back, Nico,
greetings.
As you saw in the previous panel, I
had mentioned him, but he wasn't there.  Ah,
then, later in the documentary
Nico appears.  And
I think we shouldn't wait, we should take the
plunge, there isn't much time.  Well, anything
related to
nature messages, from the most scientific
to the most emotional, everything has a
place.  There are places, non-
physical places.  I'm referring to places like
Vera Sur, what you all do, these
kinds of gatherings, and I think there's
also a network of collaboration; it's
not a selfish world in general because there's a
sense that there's a benefit that's
more important than what each person can
do, right?  So, I think that in
general, and I don't know if the people
here agree, in general you can always
find a helping hand, you can always
find people willing to lend a hand
and support.  Well, because
in the end what we do here in
disseminating nature-related topics,
while important, requires
a multitude of other things afterwards,
right?  Reaching the level of politics at a
global level, not even at the level of
Chile, right?  So, what we can
do is teach my 4-year-old daughter to
want to, to like, and
eventually want to do like
the dove and want to interview Charles
Darwin in the future.
But that's how we encourage what
we do, that this book—I'm
a fan of Jose—can
be in as many homes as
possible.  I read it with my daughter; in
fact, she likes the pictures more than the pictures.
That's what we can do and
encourage.  And that's the network, that's the community.
René, thank you very much.  A big round of applause
for our panelist René!
Well, you've already seen, and you know
the diversity of formats, we were
talking and each one is multiple here
too, and I think we all
agree that what we do moves and
excites us.  And I think, and
in fact I wanted to show you many
stories because I want to
tell you that each one of
these is an essay of a language, a
tone perhaps that will reach a
small audience, but each one is an attempt.
Ultimately, we have to keep trying
because different formats will
find different audiences.  And if you
were able to deliver a message to the
people and communities you want to
communicate and share, find that
format that you like and
find that story that moves
you, because that's how it
spreads.  Uh, and also, uh, what we've
talked about here, building relationships with other
people.  This is a job,
writing is sometimes a
solitary job, but work for
nature has to be collaborative
because otherwise we stay in
very small spaces.  So, well,
just to throw out some
headlines.  That's a magazine
we made with 20 reporters from the
schools of María Pinto, which is the
commune where I live, a rural commune
where we selected children who
created their own reports, we did
workshops, but ultimately they
developed the content to some degree
.  And that can be replicated.   It's
very easy to do.  And the children,
some of them did, of course,
word searches, crossword puzzles, right?  There are a
lot of them, but it's something that made
sense to them, that they wanted to communicate
about their territory.  And now
that we are at the gates of the
Flowering Desert, this is a hybrid book that
I really like to make because they are stories,
narrative texts that are
also mixed with information.  So, for those
who are more interested in the data, it's here,
but also for those who like to follow
a story or who like to
share it with the family at night, it's
there too.  Así es que exploren
formatos y y y contagien eh la pasión de
lo que les comoda a ustedes.  That's it,
a big round of applause.  This is amazing.   I
like it, I like it.  Me too, my son does
n't listen to me yet, but hey, I
have a son here in Chile, he's a
Chilean.  Uh, her mother is from here in
Chile, I'm Colombian and we also really
like to give her books as gifts.  I even
brought a lot of books from
Colombia to share with him too,
and here, when I have the chance, I go
looking in bookstores for
just this: to sit down, to listen to each other
through this beautiful exercise, uh,
green book, go over there.
Incredible.  Ready.  Uh, well, this is Paloma.
I already have a couple of things.  Yes.
Uh, the first one has to do with
something René said regarding his
daughter.
I reproduced extensively, so I have several of these beings that come from one, and something I've tried hard to do is to turn around what is offered to them.  So, for example, the only
TV my children watch is
nature documentaries, which you might say,
"Torturer mother."  Well, yes.  And
the result of that has been incredible
as an experiment, because my children are
people who sit down and say,
"We want to watch TV and we're ready, but
with us, but what do you want to watch?"  An
animal documentary.
And they tell you things like, "Mom, it's a
brown bear, how come you don't understand anything?"
And I think that educating the
youngest audiences to love nature
is fantastic, because anyone
who has children knows that children don't
see things just once.  So I've
seen Patagonia 73 times, not just once, okay?  And
that awakens your eye to look at
the details of the beauty that one
experiences in nature also
through something, since we are
urban animals, eh, that could be trash,
right?, here on TV.  That's one point.
The second point that I think is
important is the role of the human element.  Hey,
you made a reference to
the pipe documentary.  My teacher Pulpo,
last year's winner, was also the
Humans with Elephants experience,
which Ladera actually brought to
Santiago Wild this year.  And you and I
were talking about
trying to explain why the
illustration was so beautiful, and I think it's
so beautiful because it involves
a human, and we humans are
good at understanding humans.
And besides, science says, the
IPCC says that if we don't involve the
human factor in the conversation about
the future of nature, all
nature protection measures
are doomed
to fail.  And so
the entire international agenda is also moving
towards understanding
humans as just another animal.  And that's
also something we have to
give back to ourselves,
like understanding ourselves as an animal in the
ecosystem that hopefully isn't just
an invasive species, right?  So, I think we
have a lot to learn from
translating science into new
ways of telling stories.
What does it mean to involve the human element
when the IPCC says so?  What does it mean to
not be so catastrophist when the IPSC
recommends it?
Well, I think that needs to be turned into stories and brought to people because if the CPI says it's scientifically proven, and we can probably find a way to renew our narratives.  That.
Thank you so much.  A big round of applause for
Paloma, please.
Y adicional a esto, ¿no?  What's
also very important is that
rural communities, whether urban or not, can generate those capacities
in different places; they need
tools, and that's where education comes in, and that's where
this whole exercise comes in, right?  How do I bring the microphone closer, how do I bring the camera closer, how do I bring the illustration closer, as an exercise in building from autonomy.
How important is the autonomy of so
many different kinds of knowledge that exist there?  Uh, yesterday
I saw the colleagues who came from the
north and suddenly he sat me down with the
grandfather to show me the video of the Jaguar,
we listened to it while I had dinner and he told me about the
Puma.  He says, "Over there the jaguar, over here
the puma."  The relationship ends there.  And I
tell him, "Look, they made some
coexistence measures so that the livestock
in this case doesn't go where the
puma is."  And that's how we started a conversation
based on a video, right?  But that
knowledge, that understanding, that which is
there, has to be just as valid as the knowledge of the
person who has also, we would say
in Colombia, put in the effort to
study, to transform all of this,
because that local knowledge is very important
and is just as important as the knowledge
that is acquired through experience and that is
acquired in universities.  It's just as
important.  And just as this
beautiful ecosystem shows how we connect with
professionals and different areas of knowledge
, it's also important to bring the knowledge of
those people, communities, and
territories
here.  And one of the things that I think
we owe in this panel,
and that can be done in the
next one, is to bring in the community communicators, of which there will be
many.  Yesterday, someone
from a community I don't remember because it
was very quick showed us something they
were doing in the
Stefen community, which I don't know if it was on your panel.
Uh, someone brought in a project that
was also doing
environmental outreach.  Yes, in the community.
Estela
Claudia.
Well, she told me about it and that's what it seemed like to me
.  Uh, those kinds of spaces
too, I mean, everything's fine with what we
've achieved from above, from
the media, from the platforms, but
look at this when someone takes out a
napkin and looks here, what am I
doing?  No, this is a diagram of a
cell and I'm going to share it with my
students or leave it on a
sticker on the bus so
people can think about it.  That's
disruptive too.  How do we achieve those
little things?  So, uh, I
think this is absolutely beautiful, and it's your turn to
close, uh, because I was looking at
those images from the festival and I
saw people painting, I even paid close attention
to the illustrations, and
suddenly I saw someone making a
stroke and I said, "I want to be there at
that festival, I want to learn there. I
want to sit down and have them explain to me how
all this is done. It's beautiful. So,
well, the people who are there are
saying, "Hey, these spaces, uh, how can we
create them in other places too?" I
mean, communities, in other
places, other spaces, how is it done?
How is this created?
How is it created? I think it's
like, since it's my turn to close, which is
difficult to be the last, because I
also take up a lot of what they say,
because I think there's something very important
that René said, which is about the
natural world. It's so beautiful what
the ultimate purpose is, which is
like caring for the planet, and I
think that's also what's happening to us
with the southern region, like
You feel that we enhance
your knowledge, and we feel that we
also learn from everyone. So it's
beautiful to think of this world
as something very collaborative and generous.
This panel is called "
Dissemination of Biodiversity." If there are
people who are motivated by that, I
feel that anyone who dares, as they
say, there's not much time to lose.
Today is always the most
important minute to act, to build teams.
I think that's the most important thing about
internal teams. Here I see Feña from the South
, and Pati. We, as the
South Era, are a small group, but deep down, there are
many of us in the roles we
each fulfill. Without the team, it doesn't
work. It's a fact that it's
a mechanism, just like
nature itself, and among many
organizations as well. I think it's
about collaborating and learning from each other.
And well, everyone is invited to the festival
too, the last week of
November. Everyone is invited, so
participate in many ways
, like, as you say, workshops.
There are panels,
all these characters will be there, we'll be there
to go as a family,
as a family, entertained. Well, what
they say is, sow the seed from childhood. And
I'm also left with a message, Leo,
which I'll tell you, that Vera Sur
also has as its slogan, that it's where you have to go to
want to go out. I think that in the
end, the most important thing is to
go out into nature. I think that
outreach can be in documentaries,
in illustrations, in interviews, on
television, in all formats,
but the most important thing is to be on the
ground. I think that's the most
wonderful thing. So, like going out,
going out, going out, forcing ourselves to go out into
nature, the different Chiles, a
marvel. So let's take advantage of what we
have and go out there. A
big round of applause, please. Incredible. And
we have to go and live experiences out there
. We have to, well, be outside, not all
the time. I was saying something a little while ago,
like when I'm on the bus, what I'm seeing is what
my daughter is seeing, I
'm observing. When you said
That's it. I imagined myself in Guaviare, which
is a jungle, my arm covered in mosquitoes
as I went to take a photograph, and
there I am, experiencing it now.
So, feeling it, going out here to
see these snow-capped mountains,
reconnecting there—something that
indigenous communities have a lot of—and we have to
return there, to
that listening, to those
living stories that are there. Well, we'll
close this panel now. Thank you to everyone
who is still connected at
www.travolution.org.